User Roles Blog (#119)
supertokens/blog: content/introducing-user-roles-authorization-with-supertokens/index.md

---
title: "Introducing User Roles Authorization with SuperTokens"
description: "With user roles, you can now use SuperTokens to easily attach a different set of permissions to each user."
date: "2022-10-27"

> cover: "user_roles_cover.png"

Reviewer: the size of this image in card_covers folder is too large compared to the size in which it's viewed. The card cover folder is only used for the blog listing as opposed to the static/covers folder which is used for when the blog is clicked on.

So make the size of the card_covers image smaller

Today, you can create new roles and permissions, assign them to users, and protect API and website routes with SuperTokens. Let's go over each one at a high level.

- Create new roles and permissions - With SuperTokens, roles and permissions are simple strings that can be assigned to users. That means you can name your role anything from `user` to `super-admin-i-have-all-the-permissions`.
- Assign roles to users - Once you've created the role, you can assign roles to users after sign up. In fact, you can even assign multiple roles to a single user, so you could give someone both `regular-user` and `admin` permissions.
- Product API and website routes - Now to verify if a user has proper permissions, we need to verify that a session exists and validate that the roles/permissions saved in the access token payload have the appropriate values. Fetching the user's role from their session is simple, and since our roles are strings, verification is as simple as a string comparison.

## Part 2 - Implement SuperTokens User Roles

![Authorization Functions](./authorization-functions.png)

### Enabling user roles with SuperTokens

> We've built user roles based on the principles of[RBAC](http://supertokens.com/blog/roles-based-access-control-with-supertokens).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've built user roles based on the principles of [RBAC](http://supertokens.com/blog/roles-based-access-control-with-supertokens).
```

Reviewer: Please make sure such mistakes don't happen again

} else {
    await UserRoles.addRoleToUser(userId, "regular-user");
}
```

We can even manually [add the roles and permissions to the user's session payload](https://supertokens.com/docs/userroles/managing-roles-and-users) for efficient access at a later point. SuperTokens does this automatically as long as you have assigned the roles to a user before their session is created.

### Step 3) Guarding APIs based on a user's role or permissions

Assigning roles to users is only half the battle.

We also need to retrieve the roles and permissions to understand if a user is allowed to perform certain functions. We can use the following code snippet to complete session verification (the authentication piece of the puzzle) and then implement our authorization logic:

```ts
import { verifySession } from "supertokens-node/recipe/session/framework/express";
import UserRoles from "supertokens-node/recipe/userroles";

app.delete("/blog", verifySession(), async (req, res) => {
    let blogId = req.body.blogId
    let userId = req.session.getUserId();

    // if the user is an admin, we will get ["admin"], 
    // else we will get ["regular-user"]

>     let roles = session.getClaimValue(UserRoles.UserRoleClaim)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    let roles = req.session.getClaimValue(UserRoles.UserRoleClaim)
```

    // if the role is "admin", we get ["read:all", "delete:all", "edit:all"]
    // else we get ["read:all", "delete:self", "edit:self"]

>     let permissions = await session.getClaimValue(UserRoles.PermissionClaim)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    let permissions = await req.session.getClaimValue(UserRoles.PermissionClaim)
```

---
title: "Introducing User Roles Authorization with SuperTokens"
description: "With user roles, you can now use Supertokens to easily attach a different set of permissions to each user."
date: "2022-10-27"

> cover: "user_roles_cover.png"

Reviewer: blog cover not rendering in the preview

category: "featured"
author: "SuperTokens team"
---

### Table of Contents

> - [Part 1 - Introducing user roles and understanding why authorization matters](#part-1---introducing-user-roles-and-understanding-why-authorization-matters)

Reviewer: it's very strange that you have part 1 and part 2 when the content of both of these are in this blog. Please remove "part 1" "part 2"

  - [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [What are user roles and why are they important for user authentication?](#what-are-user-roles-and-why-are-they-important-for-user-authentication)
  - [User Roles and SuperTokens](#user-roles-and-supertokens)
- [Part 2 - implement SuperTokens User Roles](#part-2---implement-supertokens-user-roles)

>   - [Enabling user roles with Supertokens](#enabling-user-roles-with-supertokens)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [Enabling user roles with SuperTokens](#enabling-user-roles-with-supertokens)
```

Reviewer: Please be mindful about the capital T - as I had said earlier

User roles address the authorization side of the puzzle. Continuing on our momentum with our authentication product, we’re excited to help you manage your users with finer controls without compromising on application security. 

If you're looking to implement user roles today, check out the second part of this post or our [user roles documentation](https://supertokens.com/docs/userroles/introduction).

![AuthN to AuthZ](./authn-to-authz.png)

### What are user roles and why are they important for user authentication?

User Roles is built based on principles of roles-based access control (RBAC).

RBAC is a security model that restricts access to resources based on the roles that users have within an organization. Users are assigned to specific roles and those roles are granted permissions to access certain resources.

Let's try building a blogging app with user roles.  

> We'd want to have a `regular users` role that allows `regular users` to read all blog posts, but only edit or delete posts created by themselves. We'd also want to have an `admin` role where `admins` can create, edit, and delete all blog posts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'd want to have a `regular-users` role that allows users to read all blog posts, but only edit or delete posts created by themselves. We'd also want to have an `admin` role where admins can create, edit, and delete all blog posts.
```

In formal notation, the actions that can be taken can be represented as strings like:

-   Read all blogs: `read:all`

-   Delete all blogs: `delete:all`

-   Delete blogs created by self: `delete:self`

-   Edit all blogs: `edit:all`

-   Edit blogs created by self: `edit:self`

These are known as permissions. In a grid form, the roles and permissions for our example app will look like this:

![Permission Grid](./permission_grid.png)

> The "edit:all" permission implies "edit:self" as well. Same goes for the "delete" permission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `edit:all` permission implies `edit:self` as well. Same goes for the `delete:all` permission.
```

To learn more about RBAC, check out our [blog post going in depth on RBAC](http://supertokens.com/blog/roles-based-access-control-with-supertokens).

### User Roles and SuperTokens

We built user roles with simplicity in mind. Our goal was to build secure authorization that can be set up in the span of minutes, not hours. As a result, our default user roles product is perfect for most non-complex use cases. For power users, we've left plenty of room to work with a product such as [permit.io](http://permit.io/) to extend our core permission feature set.

Today, you can create new roles and permissions, assign them to users, and protect API and website routes with SuperTokens. Let's go over each one at a high level.

> Create new roles and permissions - With SuperTokens, roles and permissions are simple strings that can be assigned to users. That means you can name your role anything from `user` to `super-admin-i-have-all-the-permissions`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create new roles and permissions - With SuperTokens, roles and permissions are simple strings that can be assigned to users. That means you can name your role anything from `user` to `super-admin-i-have-all-the-permissions`.
```

> Assign roles to users - Once you've created the role, you can assign roles to users before or after sign up. In fact, you can even assign multiple roles to a single user, so you could give someone both `regular-user` and `admin` permissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Assign roles to users - Once you've created the role, you can assign roles to users after sign up. In fact, you can even assign multiple roles to a single user, so you could give someone both `regular-user` and `admin` permissions.
```

> Product API and website routes - Now to verify if a user has proper permissions, we need to verify that a session exists and validate that the roles/permissions saved in the access token payload have the appropriate value. Getting the user role is simple with `UserRoleClaim` and since our roles are strings, verification is as simple as a string comparison.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Product API and website routes - Now to verify if a user has proper permissions, we need to verify that a session exists and validate that the roles/permissions saved in the access token payload have the appropriate values. Fetching the user's role from their session is simple, and since our roles are strings, verification is as simple as a string comparison.
```

> ## Part 2 - implement SuperTokens User Roles

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Part 2 - Implement SuperTokens User Roles
```

![Authorization Functions](./authorization-functions.png)

### Enabling user roles with Supertokens

> With SuperTokens, you can implement user roles in as little as 5 minutes. In this post, we'll walk through how to implement user roles into your application.
> 
> If user roles and RBAC are unfamiliar terms to you, check out our [RBAC primer](http://supertokens.com/blog/roles-based-access-control-with-supertokens) and user roles launch post for context.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

For our example, we'll be building a blogging app.

First, we have a `regular-user` role which will allow users to read all blog posts, but only edit or delete posts created by them.

We will also have an `admin` role which allows admins to create, edit, and delete any blog posts.

> The code snippets below are for a NodeJS backend, but similar logic applies for the other backend SDKs offered by SuperTokens as well. 

### Step 1) Creating the roles and permissions

> To start, SuperTokens needs to know about the roles and permissions before they can be assigned to users. For that, we can use the UserRoles.createNewRoleOrAddPermissions function exposed by the SDK:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start, SuperTokens needs to know about the roles and permissions before they can be assigned to users. For that, we can use the `UserRoles.createNewRoleOrAddPermissions` function exposed by the SDK:
```

```ts

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

import UserRoles from "supertokens-node/recipe/userroles";

> // creating the admin role and adding permissions to it.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

// creating the admin role and adding permissions to it.
```

await UserRoles.createNewRoleOrAddPermissions("admin", ["read:all", "delete:all", "edit:all"])

> // creating the regular-user role and adding permissions to it.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

// creating the regular-user role and adding permissions to it.
```

await UserRoles.createNewRoleOrAddPermissions("regular-user", ["read:all", "delete:self", "edit:self"])

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

date: "2022-10-27"
cover: "user_roles_cover.png"
category: "featured"

> author: "Advait Ruia, CEO"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: "SuperTokens team"
```
